So we've seen throughout the bits of code that were written so far that we've used some functions like the
get_header() and have_posts().
And also the template tags that we've used here.
These functions are a part of WordPress's core.
So they are included in WordPress and made available for us to use directly without, you know, having
to include a special file at the top or anything.
During this course we'll use a lot of WordPress's functions. But WordPress also allows us to create our own functions.
So for example you can write some functions to use
WordPress's hooks. And we'll talk about hooks later in the course. Or maybe you need to use functions if
you have some bits of code that you'll have to reuse in multiple templates.
All custom functions that you write in your theme must be included inside of a file called
functions.php.
So let's go to our root folder and create a new file. And let's call it functions.php. And then
we can write any function here. And it will be available in all templates without having to include
this functions.php file.
But before writing any custom function that will add some feature to your theme you must think if you
should put it in your theme or in a plugin. If this feature should work regardless of what theme is currently active
then you should put it in a plugin. Because once you  switch the theme
it will be gone.
So plugins in WordPress adds extra functionality to WordPress without you know having to belong to a specific
theme.
So in this course we will have some functionality that will require creating plugins. But for now let's just
focus on theme functions.
So let's now start creating some functions.
So I'm gonna open a PHP tag. And let's go to index.php.
And here we have the post information, the date and the author.
And this is a fairly long piece of code and it will probably be used in other templates, right?
So when we create another template it doesn't make sense to write this whole thing again.
So let's move this piece of code into a function and then call the function here.
So let's cut this and open a PHP tag. And let's call a function that we will create in a
moment. And let's call it post_meta().
Now we can go to functions.php and create a function post_meta() and just paste the HTML
for the meta information.
But we can't just paste HTML inside of PHP
we must close the PHP first and paste and then open the PHP again to close the curly braces for
the function, right?
And I still have a syntax error here.
I think I forgot to add the function keyword and sorry for that.
All right.
So if you don't like to close and open PHP tags in order to put HTML
we can remove these PHP tags and then echo the HTML as a PHP string,
right?
So let's do that now. Let's echo the "Posted on" as a string.
And let's also echo the ANCHOR tag as a string.
So let's open single quotes and then remove the echo in the PHP tag and close the single quotes. And
then append  the function. And then let's remove the closing PHP tag. And  just wrap the rest of the HTML tag
in single quotes. Right? And then we'll have to do the same for the rest of the lines.
I'll probably skip this in the video. I think you can do this on your own.
So I'm done with echoing the PHP strings. Here it is if you want to copy anything. Let's make sure
what we've done is still working.
So I want to go back to index.php and let's remove this var_dump(). And then let's go to the browser and
refresh.
And as you can see everything is still in place.
The Posted on, the date and the author name. We have a space missing before the "By".
So let's add it here.
So it's looking good now so let's go back to the index.html and let's do the same thing for
the Read More link.
Let's cut this from here. And let's open PHP tags and let's call a function that we will create
in a moment. And let's call it readmore_link().
And now let's go to functions.php.
And let's create this function. So function
readmore_link().
And than  let's paste the HTML
and then we will have to convert the HTML to strings like we did in the last function.
I'll do it also and skip this in the video.
So I'm done now.
Here it is if you want to copy anything.
Now let's go back to the browser and make sure everything is working fine.
And looks like the title is echoing twice here.
Ok.
So the_title_attribute() function already echoes the title.
And we are already echoing the string here.
So we need a function that returns the result and not echo it. And to do that we can still use the_title_attribute()
but posted an array with a key of echo and this key of echo will be false, right?
And let's check.
And our problem should be solved. Great.
So let's go back now.
And we need to do more improvement.
So as you may imagine this function that PHP file as we go further in the theme can contain a lot
of functions,
right?
So it's always a good idea to do some organization in functions.php. So you can create some files
and then include these files in functions.php.
So let's do that now in our theme. Let's create a new file called helpers and we'll put inside of it functions
like these two helper functions.
All right.
So let's create this file inside a new folder and let's call it lib.
Short for library. And then inside of this folder let's create   a new file
and call it helpers.php.
And then finally let's paste, open PHP first, and then paste our functions inside of it. And then let's go back to
functions.php and include this file using require_once(). So require_once() and then the path
of the file which will be lib and then helpers.php. And let's go back and make sure it's still
working.
And as you can see everything is still working in theme. But now we just have things more organized.
So one last thing for this lecture. Any function that you create in your theme it must be prefixed with
a unique prefix.
And this is not only a best practice but also it's a requirement.
If you want to submit themes to WordPress or Theme Forest. And this prefix is usually your theme name.
So let's prefix our functions here with our theme name firsttheme.
And let's also go back to index.php and modify the function calls. And let's just make sure everything is
still working.
And the reason we did this is to avoid having a conflict with an another plugin or maybe a WordPress core
function that has the same name.
So you shouldn't have generic names to your functions to avoid any PHP errors.
So I think that's it for functions for now.
Let's move on to the next lecture.